so this video will be a challenge to fix
a bug in the calculator rap so we'll
just start by demonstrating that bug so
you can see that I've got the calculator
app running on an emulator now the way
that this app works the arithmetic
operation Keys will cause the previous
calculation to be performed and then
become the next operation to be
performed so this is done by stirring
the operation in the pending operation
variable as we saw when writing the code
in previous videos now if you
accidentally press an incorrect
operation key when the input is empty
you can correct it by pressing the
correct one and you can see the
operation change on the screen as I
press each one so to see the bug I'm
starting afresh so I don't need to clear
anything but just to make sure I'm going
to press a to clear rather the pending
operation by pressing equals then I'm
going to enter 57 equals then minus 6
and then multiply so the result of 51 is
displayed and the next number that I
enter should multiply 51 but before
entering another number I'm going to
rotate the device so we go into
landscape mode now if I want to multiply
by 51 by 2 I should just be able to do 2
equals 2 equals now that didn't go well
so the problem is that although the
contents of the edit text widget
survival rotation none of the apps
variables do so the activity is
destroyed and recreated when the device
is rotated remember so the pending
operation variable is reset to were
equals all right so the challenge is to
fix the bug by storing and retrieving
the app state when the device is rotated
now if you're not sure how to do this or
to how to approach it review the last
videos in section 5 where I discussed
the activity lifecycle and where we
saved the contents of the text view for
the button click app alright so pause
the video here and when you've had a go
at that and you're ready to come back
and see the
solution you can put you can start the
video and I'll go through and do that so
pause the video now
all right so let's look at the solution
so the methods we need to override to
store state are on save instance state
and on restore instance state and that's
a reminder here's the activity lifecycle
slide from section five
now unsaved instance state is called if
needed when andrew is about to destroy
the activity yes it does when the
orientation changes so now that we've
created a separate layout for landscape
mode the reason why Android destroys and
recreates the activity may make more
sense that's because it's an entire new
layout that has to be applied and the
easiest and safest way to do that is to
just start again so with all these
challenges there's often more than one
way to solve them the real test here is
does it work
and definitely not does your code look
the same as mine all right so state can
be restored in either uncreate or on
restore instance state and I'm going to
use on restore instance state but if
your solution used on create that's fine
the reason I prefer not to a store state
in there in the uncreate is mainly
because it's a good idea to keep the
code in a separate method just to keep
things easier to understand in addition
if you try to use the bundle you don't
create you have to check that it isn't
null
now if there was no save state then
bundle will be no there whereas on
restore instance state is only ever
called if there is a valid bundle
alright so let's go back to Android
studio for my solution to fixing this
bug
all right so a bundle contains a list of
pairs of keys and values so we need keys
to store the pending operation and
operand 1 variables under 2 anomalous to
get them back again now because we'll be
using the same keys in two different
places will store them in two constants
now a lot Java where everything must
exist inside a class Kotlin allows
variables to declared at the top level
of the file outside of the class in fact
for Val constraints it insists on this
so if I tried to put this next piece of
code that I'm about to type inside the
main activity class would actually get
an error all right so let's go back up
to the top of main activity and we want
to put this before the class definition
I'm gonna start on line 10 and I'm going
to type private Const Val and an
uppercase state underscore pending
underscore operation is equal to in
double quotes pending operation in
private Const Val State let's go up
around 1 equal to double quotes up
around 1
now the actual contents of those strings
can be pretty much anything but there's
a limit to how big a bundle can be so
don't go using incredibly long strings
and just in case it wasn't obvious when
we discussed this earlier data is saved
in a bundle as key value pairs so the
keys we'll be using are these two
constants state and it's called pending
underscore operation and state and a
score operand 1 now what we want to get
the value for up around 1 we use the key
state and let's go up around 1 to
retrieve it and similarly for the
pending operation now saving the
variables is just a case of overriding
on save instance state using the
shortcut ctrl o or you can get a list of
methods to overwrite from generate on
the code menu now I'm going to put the
over overridden methods at the end of
the code but before the final curly
brace right down to the bottom just down
here and I'm going to do a ctrl o and we
want unsaved instance States I'm just
going to type the first three letters
unsaved there it is there on saving some
states I'm just going to
enter but before I do that do you be
careful here because there's two
versions of this function we want the
one that takes a single argument
and unfortunately that appears further
down the list than the one that we don't
what the one that I've actually
currently highlighted so I'm going to
use the down arrow key to move to the
second definition so you can see the
second definition there was only got
just a one argument out state which is a
bundle all right now press Enter and
there's a slight oddity about this
function to do with the interoperability
with Java and I'm gonna come back to
that in a minute but first we need to
add our variables to the bundle so the
overridden function is going to become
as follows so we're gonna leave the
first call just saved it on save
instance state and then we're going to
append to that if parentheses up around
one is not equal to know in code block
we're going to do our state dot puts
double parentheses that's going to be
state underscore upper end one comma
space and operand 1 and bang bang' so
two exclamation marks you actually get
an error there we'll talk about that
shortly and then I'm going to put on the
line after outside the closing code
block out state dot put string and state
and it's called pending operation comma
space pending operation so notice that
we have to check firstly that operand
one isn't no otherwise the program would
crash if the device is rotated before
any numbers had been entered all right
so we've got this error at the moment on
line 113 if you hover over that it's
only safe or none no asserted calls are
allowed on a nullable receiver of type
bundle
now if you haven't got that error please
keep watching and I'm going to explain
why you haven't so the problem is that
the out state parameter is of type
bundle question mark which is a nullable
bundle now Kotlin doesn't allow method
calls to be made on objects that could
be no that's a classic problem that
causes null pointer exceptions and
Kotlin actually make sure we don't get
those anymore
it does its best we can still get them
if we go using the bangbang operator
which we shouldn't for example
so using bangbang is one possible
solution so in other words I could come
back up to here some exclamation marks
the bangbang but what we're doing is
asserting that our state won't be known
can we be really sure than it can't be
no well actually yes we can the reason
is that unsaved instance state is only
called if there's a bundle to save in
fact you may will not have that error
googler adding the at non null
annotations to the android framework
code all the time if they mark out
status non no and Kotlin will be able to
use a non nullable bundle type instead
of this bundle question mark that it's
using as the argument on line 110 so
bangbang is one option but Kotlin also
provides another operator that i think
is more appropriate here so let's go
back and replace the double bang with a
safe call operator which is the question
mark so we're gonna go back and delete
that the bang bang and replace that with
the question mark so that also fixes the
error and actually is a safer way to
deal with this so that applies probably
everywhere that you're accessing a
property or calling a method on an
object that's of a nullable type so
where as bangbang asserts that the
object currently no and throws an
exception if it is the safe call
operator won't actually make the call if
the object is null so in our code here
put double just won't be called if our
state is null so that line will just do
nothing so that's a safest solution than
the double bang operator and I suggest
you try to use the safe call operator in
these situations now it doesn't really
matter here because we know that two out
state won't be null but safe call can be
used even when you can't be sure and
we'll see that used again throughout the
course so you're gonna feel for whether
it's a good way to deal with nullable
objects okay so there's a third approach
that can be used here now before I
change the code to use it I should
really point out that till you need to
be very careful when using this approach
so don't go using this approach
indiscriminately
you need to be very sure that you want
to stay
and what you're doing so what I'm going
to do is modify the functions signature
so that it accepts an on no bundle
argument so the way to do that is to get
rid of the question mark from the bundle
type and once I've done that I can
actually get rid of the safe up the safe
call operator like so now I can't
predict the future but it wouldn't
surprise me if this function signature
gets generated automatically before too
long it may even be the code that you've
got if you're watching this video
sometime after I recorded it as I said
you do need to be careful when using
this though if you're absolutely sure
that outstate really will be an
unknowable type then this is perfectly
valid but changing the function
signatures of overridden methods mustn't
be done without fully understanding what
you're doing so this is the approach I'm
going to take in this app now one reason
is that you'll already find code like
this out there people are already doing
this and although I haven't yet found an
example of Google doing it with unsaved
instance State there may well be
examples by the time you watch this
video now restoring the variable is done
by reading it from a bundle and I'm also
going to update the display so that the
user can see which operation is pending
once again though be careful because
there's an overloaded version of the on
restore instance state method two so we
want the one that accepts a single
bundle argument and I'm just going to
generate it just after this on same
instance state function let's go ahead
and do that doing a search for a restore
and notice we've got the two definitions
now we actually want the top one the one
that's just got the bundle argument and
not the second argument so I'm going to
press ENTER there and what I'm going to
do here is take the same approach as for
on save instance date and change the
parameter to be a non nullable bundle so
we're going to get rid of the question
mark on the type alright so after the
superdome restore instance state to line
we need to restore our two properties
from the bundle
and then display the operation in its
text view so I'm going to start by
topping up around 1 is equal to saved
instance state dot get double and the
argument is gonna be state owns
underscore operand 1 for our Const and
then pending operation equals saved
instance state dot get string and the
argument is the state is called pending
operation our constant definition then
lastly as I mentioned we're going to
display the operation so it's going to
be display operation dot txt is equal to
pending operation now that looks fairly
straightforward but it's important to
check the documentation for any methods
that you use so that you really
understand how they behave now we can do
that in Android studio by clicking on
the function that we're interested in
and using ctrl Q on Windows or Linux and
on a Mac it's actually ctrl J so we go
ahead and do that this is for the get
double and you kind of come up here then
press my key and there's the
documentation that's so popped up again
it's a ctrl Q on Windows or Linux or
ctrl J on a Mac so the documentation is
short but it does state that the
function will return 0.0 if the key
doesn't exist in the bundle well
actually it says or 0.0 if no mapping of
the desired type exists for the given
key which essentially means the same
thing so if the key with the value of
state and it's got up around 1 doesn't
exist in the bundle or if it does exist
but its value isn't a double then
operand 1 will be given the value 0.0
well that's not actually quite what we
want if we haven't stored up around 1
that's because it was no not because it
was 0 so we do want it to have the value
of null after calling it double if it
doesn't exist now we can provide a
default value to the get double function
but unfortunately that valley copy null
so the way that I suggest coping with
storing values that may be null in a
bundle is to also store a boolean to
indicate if there's a value there or not
and that's probably easy to see them to
describe so let's get to the code
so firstly we need to define another
constant for the key so I'll go right up
to the top of the file to do that
remembering that the definition is about
for class definition this is going to be
a private Const Val this one we call
state up around one stored is equal to
and we'll call this one up around one
underscore stored so next we need to
change the on the save instance state
function slightly so let's go down to
the bottom and do that now we need to
add some courage we've got this sort
code on line 113 checking to see if
operand 1 is not equal to no and then
we've got it putting a double there what
we're going to do after that line is add
a new line to put out state dot put
boolean then what state let's go up
around one underscore stored comma true
so that's all we need to do for the
unsaved instance state function
now if operand 1 was stored we can check
the value stored under the key State and
let's go up around 1 and ask or stored
and if that's true then we can call get
double otherwise operand 1 should be
null so let's update our on restore
Winston state function and we're going
to make a change here so after the super
call we're going to put a call here
we're going to put type some code if
saved instance date dot get boolean
state let's go operand 1 and let's go
stored comma space false I'm going to
open a code block and what I'm going to
do is put in this line here this operand
1 equals same instance state don't get
double that will be in the if code block
and we'll also have an LC here else
another code block operand 1 is equal to
null so now on line 122 we call the get
boolean method to retrieve the value
stored with the key state underscore
operand 1 underscore stored the call to
give boolean includes a default value of
false so if the key is in prison the
condition will be for
so only if we save true with that key
blue line 123 be executed otherwise
operated one will be set to null as you
can see on line 125 now we can lift that
assignment out of the if just like we
did earlier I click over here I can
click on that and then the light bulb
comes up I can click on that and notice
that I only get that operation what I
did click on that in the gutter notice
there that I want to do that if he's
under like this you see that just
briefly so we can also I've just clicked
if to see that come up we can come back
over here again there's a lot bulb will
click on that and lift a solid out of it
and you can see the codes been changed
for us and that should now do it for us
so let's actually run the app again and
just check that it's actually working as
we suspect it will or hope that it will
all right so I'm going to start by doing
equals 57 equals minus 6 times they're
going to rotate like I did last time and
then I'm going to type 2 equals this
time you got the answer 102 so that's
now working fine so a calculator nail
behaves as expected even when the
orientations changed now this particular
app has very little state there's just
the contents of the to edit text widgets
the content of the display operation
textview and up around one now the to
enter text widgets are saved and
restored for us Android knows that users
may type text in to edit text widgets
that's what they're there for after all
so the activities on site instance date
and on restore instance state methods
are taking care of the edit text widgets
so that's why it's important looking
back at the code to leave these super
done calls
see we don't save instance date online
hundred and twelve and super did on
restore instance state online 121 so
it's important to leave those in when we
override the on save instance state and
on restore instance state functions so
we had to deal with store and retrieve
the contents are
the textview an operand one this was
complicated slightly because we're
allowing up around one to be no and
Kotlin can't store null in the bundle so
we had to use that additional flag to
let us decide whether operand one should
be no when we try to restore it so
there's still room for improvement but
before we change the way our calculator
works we're going to look at another
method that Kotlin provides for getting
references to widgets and we'll do that
in the next video